Chapter 1: Introduction to Sequedex.

*** What is Sequedex?
Sequedex is a software package for genomic analysis that was developed by an interdisciplinary team of scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory with funding from the Laboratory-Directed Research and Development (LDRD) program.  It is currently available for use with a free license from the Technology Transfer Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory at http://sequedex.lanl.gov.  The software is currently under active development, and information about future releases will be made available at this website, and by an email distribution to the list of users downloading the software.  A publication describing the method behind Sequedex, its underlying scientific basis in evolutionary theory and protein structure, its validation on synthetic metagenomic data, and its application to ten soil metagenomics datasets has been published. [1]  It was the recepient of a 2012 R&D 100 award [2], and the entry for the award can be read here [3], together with news articles describing the need for such a software package in the NY Times [4], and xxx [5].  A specific article acompanying the release of Sequedex can be found here [6].

*** What does Sequedex do?

Sequedex is designed for maximal flexibility

*** How is Sequedex different from other sequence analysis packages?

Sequedex combines a firm grounding in evolutionary theory and phylogenetic analysis with search-engine technologies.  

Sequedex replaces the question, 'How similar is this nucleotide sequence to those in a reference database?' with the question 'Where has this peptide signature been observed before?'.  

Sequedex tests the phylogenetic range on a signature-by-signature basis, and is thus less sensitive to the confounding effects of paralogs and horizontal gene transfer.

Sequedex relys on explicit RNA-polymerase based phylogeny to separate the effects of inheritence from functional pressure when interpreting genomic data.

Sequedex can subsume functional classification schemes merely by searching example genes comprising a functional classification with phylogenetically-derived signature lists.

*** Who uses Sequedex?
Although the Sequedex software package was developed specifically to analyze large shotgun metagenomics data sets characterizing bacterial communities living in soils, just about anyone who generates or analyzes genomic data, or studies systems where microbial communities are important is a potential user of Sequedex.  Specifically:

Sequedex is written in Java and designed to run on modern laptop or desktop computers running Linux, Windows, or Macintosh operating systems 

Sequedex is designed to run on computers with a moderate amount of memory (6 GB of RAM for the Bact403 data module) that are readily available to data generators, who best understand the metadata, sample preparation protocols, and expected relationship of the data to previously published studies.  

In the process of developing Sequedex, the authors have collaborated with microbial ecologists, microbiologists, evolutionary biologists, medical doctors, epidemiologists, biochemists, and cellular biologists, exploring applications such as profiling microbial communities and microbiomes, identifying attributable changes in microbial communities and microbiomes with condition, enzyme mining, pathogen diagnosis, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of different strains of algae in differential conditions, and forensic science.  In each case, we have found Sequedex to compare favorable to existing methods in the hands of research scientists at the forefront of their field.

The developers have used Sequedex on all 48 cores of a modern server, to effectively run large datasets such as those derived from the human microbiome project or the diversity of environmental microbiomes deposited in NCBI's short read archive.  Because of its speed and robust read-by-read classification on a phylogenetic tree, the ability of users to compare their samples to archival data is limited only by their willingness to download, curate, and understand reference datasets.  Even with the simple distance metrics described below show that meaningful comparisons across research groups, sequencing methodologies, and ecosystems can be made, in order to understand the phylogeny and function of metagenomics samples in comparison to existing datasets.  We thus also expect Sequedex to be useful to genomic data centers as they struggle to organize the flood of genomic data into useful ecological, medical, and microbiological conclusions.

*** How does Sequedex work?

The Sequedex software distribution contains a Java executable that rapidly searches genomic fragments against a classified signature list, and a data module consisting of a signature list, phylogenetic tree, and a functional classification.  Sequedex first reads the signature list into a hash map, then sequentially matches each read of an input fasta file against this list, generating an output consists of three output files: a phylogenetic profile, a functional profile, and a matrix consisting of the number of reads tallied by both function and phylogeny.  The specific algorithm by which reads are assigned phylogeny and function is described in Reference [1].

The sensitivity and specificity with which Sequedex classifies short genomic fragments is determined by the signature list, phylogenetic reference tree, and functional classification contained in the data module.  The Bact403 data module distributed with Sequedex was based on 403 reference genomes and their inferred evolutionary history, shown below and available here as a pdf.

***  How do I validate Sequedex output

compare, compare, compare...

improve signature lists and functional assignments.  top-down and bottom-up.  It is a way to capture knowledge.

References for Chapter 1:
1. Berendzen, J., WJ Bruno, JD Cohn, NW Hengartner, CR Kuske, BH McMahon, MA Wolinsky, G Xie, "Rapid phylogenetic and functional classification of short genomic fragments with signature Peptides", BMC Research Notes, August, 2012

2. R&D 100 award website

3. R&D 100 award entry

4. NYT article

5. other article

6. new mexican article?
